Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, we are discussing nicotine.
Nicotine is one of the most commonly consumed substances
on the entire planet.
There are literally billions of people
that ingest nicotine on a daily basis.
Most of those people consume nicotine via smoking
and in particular, smoking tobacco.
Tobacco contains nicotine
and it contains a bunch of other things as well,
which we will talk about.
And the burning of tobacco liberates nicotine
and makes it accessible to the various cells
and tissues of the body.
But of course, there are other sources of nicotine as well.
Some people consume nicotine through dip,
that is placing tobacco on the inside of the lip
or in the cheek.
Some people consume nicotine via snuff,
which is literally the shoving of tobacco leaves
up the nostrils and allowing the tobacco
to access the nervous system and other areas of the body
by permeating into the mucosal membranes,
as is the lining, the soft lining of the nasal passages.
And of course, there are nicotine patches, nicotine gum,
there's nicotine in pill form,
there are toothpicks dipped in nicotine, et cetera.
Today, we are going to separate our discussion of nicotine
from a discussion of smoking and vaping
and the other forms of delivery for nicotine.
We will be talking about smoking and vaping
and other routes of nicotine administration,
both for sake of highlighting their detriments to health
and believe it or not, in certain cases,
keep in mind, very specific certain cases,
the possible health benefits of delivering nicotine
through specific modalities.
It turns out those modalities
do not include smoking cigarettes or vaping.
And we are going to pay particular attention to vaping today
because vaping use is on the rise,
in particular in young people,
and vaping use and the fact that most tobacco
that's consumed through vaping
includes quite amount of nicotine
has created a scenario where nicotine,
because of its ability to change certain chemicals
in the brain, can actually lead to addiction
for a number of other substances
related to vaping and vaping-associated behaviors.
If all of that seems like a lot to get your arms
and your mind around right here at the outset,
don't worry, I'll walk you through this,
regardless of whether or not
you have a background in biology or not,
I promise that you'll come through
at the end of this episode with a deep understanding
of how nicotine works in the brain and body,
some of its benefits, some of its potential drawbacks,
and you will have clear optics
as to why smoking and vaping
and other forms of nicotine delivery
have the effects that they do
on your biology and psychology.
I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast
is now partnered with Momentus Supplements.
We partnered with Momentus for several important reasons.
First of all, they ship internationally
because we know that many of you are located
outside of the United States.
Second of all, and perhaps most important,
the quality of their supplements is second to none,
both in terms of purity and precision
of the amounts of the ingredients.
Third, we've really emphasized supplements
that are single ingredient supplements
and that are supplied in dosages
that allow you to build a supplementation protocol
that's optimized for cost,
that's optimized for effectiveness,
and that you can add things and remove things
from your protocol in a way
that's really systematic and scientific.
If you'd like to see the supplements
that we've partnered with Momentus on,
you can go to livemomentus.com slash Huberman.
There you'll see those supplements,
and just keep in mind that we are constantly expanding
the library of supplements available through Momentus
on a regular basis.
Again, that's livemomentus.com slash Huberman.
Before we go any further,
I just want to highlight a key takeaway
from a previous episode,
which is our episode on focus,
and in fact was a toolkit for focus.
So during the toolkit for focus episode,
we talked about a large number of behavioral pharmacologic
and other interventions that you can use
to increase your level of concentration and focus
for whatever purpose, cognitive endeavors,
learning languages, focusing in school,
on work, et cetera, or physical pursuits.
Now, one of the key takeaways
is that there are really two key protocols
that I believe everyone should understand and know about
and why they work, because they are so effective
and also because they dovetail nicely
with some of the information
that we're going to talk about today,
which will explain why nicotine
is so effective in increasing focus.
And these two protocols are as follows.
Data based on studies done in Wendy Suzuki's lab
at New York University.
Of course, Wendy was a guest on this podcast,
so you can check out that episode if you like,
but studies done in her laboratory
point to the fact that a daily, very brief,
in fact, only 13 minute meditation
can vastly increase focus and focus ability,
not just immediately after the meditation practice,
but at all other times as well.
So again, this is a meditation practice done daily
for just 13 minutes.
It's a very simple meditation practice
where one sits or lies down, closes your eyes,
and directs your attention to a place
just between your two eyes and right above it,
so on your forehead, but just inside of that.
And please understand that your brain
does not have sensory receptors.
So unlike focusing on your fingertips
and the sensations there, if you focus on your brain,
you can't actually sense anything in your brain
except your thoughts.
So the idea then is that you continually bring your focus
back to that location just about an inch
behind your forehead over and over again.
And it's the refocusing of your attention to that location
after it drifts that succeeds
in increasing your focus ability,
again, not just during the meditation and afterward,
but at other times as well.
So this 13 minute a day meditation is exceedingly simple
and exceedingly effective.
It should be performed every day,
but if you miss a day, just go back to doing it,
don't despair too much,
and you will see these positive effects save the data,
also increase effects on mood
and other positive aspects of mental health and performance.
So that's the first tool in protocol.
The second tool in protocol relates to the general,
what I call the aero model of focus.
This was a model that I created in order to simplify
the vast amounts of data on focus and concentration
and how they are created by the various chemical systems
within your brain.
We're going to hear a lot about these chemical systems
again today in the context of nicotine,
and they are as follows.
You can think about focus on any goal or any endeavor
as an aero.
So just imagine an aero which has an aero head and a shaft,
and we'll add a third component to it in a moment.
The head of the aero, meaning the direction of your focus
is largely set by acetylcholine,
which is a chemical in the brain.
The shaft of the aero is set by a chemical called adrenaline,
also called epinephrine.
Those are the same thing.
In the brain, typically, it's referred to as epinephrine,
and in the body, it's more commonly referred to
as adrenaline, but those are the same neurochemical.
Epinephrine slash adrenaline represents the shaft
of the aero, and it's providing the energy
for which to focus.
And then we can put behind that aero a little propeller
or a motor, if you like.
And the propeller or motor in the context
of this neurochemistry model is dopamine,
which provides ongoing motivation.
It pushes that aero forward continually
as you strive to focus on a particular thing.
This particular aero model,
that is your ability to increase your focus,
can be enhanced, therefore,
by increasing acetylcholine, epinephrine,
and dopamine simultaneously.
And there are a lot of different ways to do that,
but one of the more effective ways to do that
via supplement protocols is so-called alpha-GPC.
Alpha-GPC taken in 300 milligram form,
10 to 30 minutes before a bout of cognitive work
or a bout of physical work will increase your focus
by way of increasing acetylcholine and to some extent,
increasing epinephrine as well.
The dopamine increase will have to be achieved
either through cognitive processing,
that is telling yourself you're doing a good job
and moving forward because thoughts really do impact
your levels of dopamine, or some other sort of pro-dopamine
or dopamine increasing protocol,
also discussed in the toolkit for focus
and our episode on dopamine for motivation and drive.
So the key thing here to understand
is that the 13 minute a day meditation
is a very effective way to increase focus capacity.
And then in the short term,
if you want to provide a boost now and again to focus,
300 milligrams of alpha-GPC can be very effective.
There are various sources for that,
then we'll link to one of them in the show note captions.
By no means am I saying that you need to take alpha-GPC,
a number of people will certainly opt not to,
and a number of people might be saying,
well, I've heard that alpha-GPC can increase focus
by way of increasing acetylcholine and norepinephrine
or epinephrine, but it can also increase TMAO,
which is a kind of a negative marker of cardiac health
and cardiovascular health.
For that reason, I and many others will take 600 milligrams
of a garlic capsule, which can offset that TMAO increase.
It remains uncertain as to how much alpha-GPC
one needs to take before increasing TMAO levels
to a point where it's of concern
that you would even need to take the garlic capsule.
But I just mention it in any case
because it's a pretty simple fix.
Garlic has other health benefits too, of course.
And for most people, 300 milligrams of alpha-GPC
taken every once in a while.
I certainly don't encourage people to take alpha-GPC
every time they want to focus.
I always emphasize behavioral tools first,
then focusing on nutritional tools,
and on occasion using supplement-based tools
to encourage increased levels of focus.
And then of course,
there are a number of different prescription compounds
that if you're working with a board certified physician,
they could prescribe you if you need additional tools
for focus, things like Ritalin, Adderall,
Modafinil, Armodafinil, Vyvanse, et cetera,
for many people are going to be important
and maybe even necessary for people with ADHD, et cetera.
But that's a category into itself.
And as I always say, I'm not a physician,
so I don't prescribe anything.
I'm a professor, so I profess many things.
And today, I just wanted to pass along
or redirect your attention to that episode on focus
and highlight those two tools,
the 13-minute-a-day meditation
and 300-milligram Alpha-GPC for increasing focus capacity
and for acutely, that is temporarily,
giving an additional boost for about a focus.
And of course, if you choose not to use those protocols,
that's perfectly fine too.
There's certainly no obligation.
They are simply available to you
should you choose to try them.
And if nothing else, you now have in mind
the neurochemistry of acetylcholine,
epinephrine slash adrenaline, and dopamine,
and that will really set the stage for understanding
just how effective and why nicotine is so effective
at increasing focus, motivation,
and even, as you'll soon hear,
working memory and cognitive capacity.
Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize
that this podcast is separate
from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information
about science and science-related tools
to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Thesis.
Thesis makes custom nootropics.
And to be quite direct, I do not like the word nootropics
because it translates to smart drugs.
And to be direct, again,
there is no such thing as a smart drug.
That is, there's no such thing as a drug
that can make you smarter
because there is no circuit in the brain for being smart.
There are circuits in the brain for focus.
There are circuits in the brain for task switching.
There are circuits in the brain related to creativity
and so on and so forth.
So the idea that there would be a single smart drug
or nootropic is simply foolish.
And fortunately, Thesis understands this
and therefore has created custom nootropics
that are designed to get you into the states of mind
and body that are optimal for your goals.
I've been taking thesis nootropics for quite a while now,
and I've been extremely pleased with the results.
I take a clarity formula that's specifically designed
for me prior to long bouts of cognitive work.
And I take an energy formula prior
to particularly challenging physical workouts.
To get your own personalized nootropic starter kit,
you can go online to takethesis.com slash Huberman,
take a three minute quiz,
and Thesis will send you four different formulas
to try in your first month.
Again, that's takethesis.com slash Huberman
and use the code Huberman at checkout
to get 10% off your first box.
Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker.
InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer
in getting regular blood work done
for the simple reason that many of the factors
that impact your immediate and long-term health
can only be analyzed with a quality blood test.
One of the major issues with blood tests or DNA tests,
however, is that typically you'll get your data back
and you won't know what to do with those data.
InsideTracker has solved this problem
by creating a personalized platform
where when you get numbers back
about your hormones, metabolic factors, et cetera,
it will direct you to specific protocols
in the realms of nutrition, exercise, supplementation,
and that includes things to do, things to consider,
and things not to do in order to bring those numbers
into the ranges that are optimal
for your immediate and long-term goals.
If you'd like to try InsideTracker,
you can visit insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans.
Again, that's insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 20% off.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Roka.
Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses
that are of the absolute highest quality.
The company was founded by two All-American swimmers
from Stanford and everything about Roka eyeglasses
and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind.
I've spent a lifetime working on the biology
of the visual system,
and I can tell you that your visual system
has to contend with a number of important challenges
in order for you to be able to see clearly.
Now, Roka understands this,
and everything about their eyeglasses were designed
in order for you to see with optimal clarity
regardless of activities.
Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses are superb
for wearing while you run or cycle.
In fact, they were originally designed for that purpose.
They're extremely lightweight.
In fact, most of the time I can't even remember
that they're on my face,
and they won't fall off if you get sweaty.
In addition, Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses
have a terrific aesthetic.
So while a lot of so-called performance eyeglasses out there
will make you look like a cyborg if you want to,
and they do have those varieties,
they also have varieties of aesthetic choices
that you would be very comfortable wearing to work
or to school or just out and about.
And that's one of the reasons I like them.
I don't really have to think about having too many pairs
of sunglasses or eyeglasses.
I can just have one or two of each pair,
and I'm good to go no matter where I go.
If you'd like to try Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses,
you can go to Roka, that's R-O-K-A.com,
and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off
on your first order.
Again, that's Roka, R-O-K-A.com,
and enter the code Huberman at checkout.
Let's talk about nicotine
and how nicotine impacts our brains, our bodies,
our mental performance, our mental health,
our physical performance, and our physical health.
And once again, I want to remind everybody
that we really need to separate out
a discussion about nicotine
from the discussion about the delivery device for nicotine.
In other words, when we're talking about nicotine,
we are not necessarily talking about smoking,
although we might be.
There are things associated with smoking and with vaping
and other means of getting nicotine into our system
that have their own effects,
both negative and in some cases, positive.
Indeed, later we will talk about
how you can actually use nicotine
to get over smoking addiction.
This won't come as a surprise to many people,
but what perhaps will come as a surprise
is the fact that many people
actually use nicotine-like substances or nicotine itself
in order to relieve nicotine addiction.
So we'll talk about that and what that looks like
and offer various protocols for you later in the episode.
I also want to mention here at the outset
that I have a longstanding interest in nicotine.
In fact, early in my scientific career,
I did research on nicotine and its role in brain development
and I've had a longstanding interest in neuroplasticity,
the brain's ability to change in response to experience.
And so experiments that have been done by close colleagues
and friends of mine have really emphasized the fact
that acetylcholine and in particular,
when acetylcholine activates so-called nicotinic receptors,
something you'll learn more about in a little bit,
that can actually serve as a gateway or a trigger
for directed rewiring of the brain.
So this is fascinating.
We think of nicotine as something that we take,
but actually we have receptors,
that is locations in the brain
to which nicotine binds and can exert its effects.
And those receptors did not come about
because of the existence of tobacco
or the existence of vaping pens
or because of the existence of anything in the outside world.
The fact that there are nicotinic receptors
in our brain and body tells you that acetylcholine
and nicotine themselves have very important roles
in normal brain and body function.
So much so that I often like to point to an anecdote
of a very well-known Nobel prize-winning neuroscientist.
I won't reveal who they are.
They're not a faculty member at Stanford,
but many neuroscientists know of this person
and many people in the outside world know of this person.
And they are also well-known for their love of nicotine.
I once sat in this person's office and he,
I will reveal that as a he,
consumed no fewer than three pieces of nicotine gum
during that relatively short conversation
of about 45 minutes.
And that was surprising to me.
And I asked him why he was taking so much nicotine
through nicotine gum.
And he replied that for years he had been a chronic smoker,
which on the one hand had greatly impaired
his cardiovascular health and his fitness,
no surprise there.
And we'll talk a little bit more about
what the underlying reasons are.
But most everyone, if not everyone knows
that smoking cigarettes or smoking in general
really impairs lung health.
There's just simply no question about it.
There are some more or less unhealthy ways to smoke,
but the quite honest message is that smoking of any kind
is going to disrupt lung endothelial function,
lung function, blood vessels, and so forth.
It's going to make it harder to breathe with vigor,
take deep breaths, deliver oxygen to tissues, et cetera.
That said, he also pointed out
that the data on nicotine specifically
are pointing to the fact that nicotine can be,
can be protective against certain forms
of cognitive impairment.
And that is why he continued to chew
nicotine containing gum.
And he swore by the focus enhancing
and motivation enhancing effects
of nicotine containing gum.
Now that is not a call to arms for you to run out
and start chewing or consuming nicotine containing products.
We will talk about those products later in the episode,
some of their potential advantages,
some of their potential disadvantages.
Now I share this anecdote because it nicely separates
nicotine from the delivery device
through which nicotine arrives.
Now, I haven't talked to this individual in a few years
to see whether or not the nicotine is working
to stave off any kind of Alzheimer's or neurodegenerative
or cognitive impairment that would come with age.
This gentleman is getting up in the years
and seems quite sharp nonetheless,
but then again was always exceedingly sharp.
The point is nicotine is a substance
that can both promote cognitive function
and under some conditions if taken to inappropriate
or I should say to extreme dosages
can also impair cognitive function.
So today we really need to have a nuanced conversation
about nicotine.
One that includes some of the benefits,
some of the drawbacks in particular for children,
certainly for people that are pregnant,
for people that have addictive tendencies
and for people that have depression
and any other kind of mood disorders.
What I will tell you soon is that nicotine
can be very powerful as a mood modulator
and many people who have tried to quit nicotine,
mainly through the form of smoking,
will find that their mood can drop substantially.
So nicotine does a lot of things in the brain and body
and so I'd like to begin by talking about
what exactly nicotine is
and how it impacts your brain and body.
So what is nicotine and where is it found?
Obviously nicotine is found in the tobacco plant,
but nicotine is also found in nightshades,
that is tomatoes, eggplants and sweet peppers.
Although the concentrations of nicotine
in tomatoes, eggplants and sweet peppers
is vastly lower than it is in the tobacco plant.
You actually can also find nicotine in potatoes.
Now, why is nicotine present in potatoes and tomatoes
and in the tobacco plant at all?
Well, nicotine is a plant alkaloid,
we'll get into alkaloids a little bit later,
but it is thought that these alkaloids evolved in plants
as a way to prevent insects from eating them.
And without going into a lot of insect biology,
the reason or the rationale behind this explanation
is that nicotine is not only a substance in tobacco
that people use or in the various medications
that people use, but it's also used as a pesticide
because it can dramatically disrupt
the nervous system of insects.
It can render them infertile,
which is not to say that it renders humans infertile.
I want to say again, it is not the case
that nicotine renders humans infertile,
but it can make certain insects infertile.
It can actually disrupt their motor function
and their brain function.
And the reasons that it has such different effects
on insects, in other words, it can kill them
or prevent them from reproducing
and therefore explains why plants probably evolved
to have this plant alkaloid, nicotine.
In humans, because of the differences
in receptors for nicotine,
where they're located in the types of receptors,
the effects of nicotine on humans is quite a bit different.
And again, it does not cause infertility in humans.
Although I will talk a little bit later
about some double-blind peer-reviewed studies
conducted in humans that indicate that, for instance,
nicotine can reduce penile girth,
that is the girth of the penis,
and can lead to certain forms of sexual dysfunction.
And those changes are largely downstream
of changes in blood flow and endothelial cell function.
Endothelial cells are the cells
that make up blood vessels and other vascular-type tissues
within the brain and body.
So nicotine is found in these plants.
And what we can know for sure
is that at some point in human evolution,
somebody or some group of people,
either, and here I'm completely guessing,
it's a just-so story,
but someone or some group must have inhaled the smoke
from the tobacco plant
or put the dried leaves of the tobacco plant
against some mucosal tissue,
any of the different mucosal linings of their body
by which substances can pass through, that's right.
Any of the mucosal soft-lining tissues of the body
will allow certain substances,
not all certain substances, to pass in.
That's why people can put tobacco in their mouth
and a certain amount of nicotine
makes it into the bloodstream,
put tobacco up their nose,
certain amount of nicotine gets into the bloodstream.
I haven't heard of people putting tobacco
in other orifices of their body,
containing mucosal tissue,
and I'm certainly not suggesting people do that,
but you get the idea
and how nicotine gets from these plants,
these dried leaves, into the bloodstream.
Burning tobacco leads to a heat-induced change
in the availability of nicotine,
and this is why smoking tobacco or vaping tobacco
simply by heating it up allows the nicotine to be liberated
and go into the bloodstream
simply by inhaling it into the lungs.
We will get back to smoking of various kinds later,
but right now let's just keep our attention
on how nicotine is pulled from these plants
and into the human body.
Now, whether by inhalation
or whether or not by placing it in contact
with the mucosal tissue of the mouth
or other mucosal-containing orifice of the body,
the nicotine then gets into the bloodstream.
And once it's in the bloodstream,
it only exerts its effects
because it binds to certain so-called nicotinic receptors.
Okay, so the nicotinic receptors
are of the acetylcholinergic variety.
I know this is a lot to think about and a lot to hear
if you haven't heard about this,
but it's actually quite simple.
Anyone can understand this.
Acetylcholin is a molecule, a chemical that is,
that's released in the brain and body,
and when it binds to receptors,
that is little parking spots on cells,
it changes the way those cells behave.
Those cells can increase their activity
and release other chemicals.
They can become electrically active.
They can do any number of different things.
When we ingest nicotine, it gets into the bloodstream,
and eventually some of that will get into the brain
and some of it gets into the body.
And in both the brain and body,
there are these so-called nicotinic acetylcholine receptors.
Now the so-called family, and indeed they are a family,
this is how we refer to groups of receptors
of related design and genetic background, just like humans.
You have a family of these acetylcholine receptors
that are of the nicotinic variety.
So, you know, maybe on one street in your neighborhood,
you know the Joneses on another street,
you know the Chows on another street.
Well, in your body,
you have the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors,
and then you have the so-called
muscarinic acetylcholine receptors.
Today it's really simple.
Nicotine only binds to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
and there are a bunch of different ones
on a bunch of different tissues.
And the differences in those receptors
dictate what sorts of effects
the nicotine will have on those tissues.
So let's talk about what those effects are
and let's do that by dividing the effects of nicotine
into effects on the brain,
so everything from the neck up and on the body,
the so-called central nervous system and the periphery.
Although I want to point out that your spinal cord
is part of the central nervous system,
so in fairness to the reality,
your brain and spinal cord are all central nervous system,
everything else is considered the periphery.
Now, there are a lot of different
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors,
but for those of you that want to know,
you have aficionados,
or if you're ultra curious about this,
the main effects of nicotine in the brain
are mediated by nicotine binding
to the so-called alpha-4 beta-2 receptor,
alpha-4 beta-2 receptor.
Even if you don't care about receptor subtypes,
that's going to come up later when we discuss
why nicotine suppresses appetite.
In fact, one of the major reasons
why people don't want to quit smoking
or they quit smoking or another form of ingesting nicotine
and then they relapse, they go back to smoking
or ingesting nicotine in some other way
is because indeed nicotine will increase metabolism
and reduce hunger in large part
by binding to this alpha-4 beta-2 receptor
in a particular area of the brain.
We're going to return to that in a little bit,
but if you've ever heard that nicotine kills the appetite,
indeed it does.
It's not the behavior of smoking itself,
it's not because you always have a cigarette in your mouth
that you're not eating more food,
although I suppose that might be a minor effect.
There are direct effects of nicotine on both appetite,
that is it reduces appetite,
and direct effects on metabolism,
that is it increases metabolism
through its effects on some other areas
of the brain and body we'll talk about in a moment.
And within the brain,
nicotine binds to this alpha-4 beta-2 receptor
in various locations in the brain.
And there are three and maybe a fourth
that we'll talk about neurochemical effects of nicotine
after you ingest it.
First things first, when you ingest nicotine
by smoking nicotine containing tobacco,
or if you place tobacco in contact with the mucosal lining
of the nasal passages of the mouth,
it takes about two to 15 minutes
for that nicotine to enter the bloodstream.
Smoking hits the bloodstream faster,
vaping even faster, I should mention,
for a variety of reasons,
and placing tobacco directly in contact
with the mucosal lining is going to be the slowest.
Now, as I mentioned before,
nicotine gets into the bloodstream,
and then because nicotine can pass
through the so-called blood-brain barrier, the BBB,
which is basically a fence around the brain,
because it can pass through the blood-brain barrier,
it's going to have very rapid effects on the brain
in these four major categories of neurochemicals
and neural circuits.
The first of those categories,
and this is a very important one,
this is one that was brought up in the episode
on dopamine motivation and drive,
and I think not just all scientists,
but all human beings should know that within their brain,
they have what is called the mesolimbic reward pathway.
The mesolimbic reward pathway,
if you just want to call it the dopamine reward pathway,
is, as the name suggests,
a set of connections between a brain area
called the ventral tegmental area.
You don't have to remember the names of these things,
of course, but if you want to, that's fine too.
The ventral tegmental area, or VTA,
connects to another area called the nucleus accumbens.
Now, here's what's very important.
Nicotine triggers the release of dopamine
from the nucleus accumbens.
This is what gives nicotine its rewarding properties.
It increases motivation.
It tends to give a not so subtle,
but very transient increase in feelings of wellbeing
and alertness and motivation,
and that's because of the increase in dopamine
caused by nicotine directly within the nucleus accumbens.
Nicotine also triggers the release of certain neurochemicals
from the ventral tegmental area itself,
and those impinge on nucleus accumbens
and increase dopamine levels further.
This is what makes the rewarding properties,
or sometimes referred to as the reinforcing properties
of nicotine, so powerful.
This is why so many billions of people ingest nicotine
in one form or another.
It's also why nicotine is so hard to quit,
because there's a potent increase in dopamine
from multiple neural circuit pathways
within this mesolimbic reward circuitry.
Now, within the mesolimbic reward circuitry,
there's an interesting feature.
There are accelerators that essentially
push out more dopamine, get more dopamine released,
and there are breaks of the so-called GABAergic variety.
GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmitter.
You don't need to know too much about it
to just understand that nicotine both increases dopamine,
but also decreases the activity of GABA,
and so this is like pushing on the accelerator for dopamine,
but also removing the break.
So there's a two-pronged effect of nicotine
on reinforcement reward dopamine-related pathways,
the feel-good motivation pathways,
and that is an increase in dopamine
and a decrease in GABA,
and again, that's all mediated
through this mesolimbic reward pathway
involving the ventral tegmental area
and the nucleus accumbens.
So if you can conceptualize
even just 5% of what I just told you,
or even if you can just remember,
nicotine increases dopamine,
and that's why it feels so good.
It makes you want more of it.
You will have everything you need to know in mind
in order to understand both why nicotine is so highly used
and indeed abused, why it's so hard to quit,
and that will point to avenues
as to how to quit or reduce intake,
and it also points to how nicotine can actually be used
in an antidepressant way should you choose,
and we will talk about what the various criteria are
for choosing that,
but just understand nicotine increases motivation,
it decreases negative feelings of mood,
it increases positive feelings of mood and motivation.
Before we continue with today's discussion,
I'd like to just briefly acknowledge our sponsor,
Athletic Greens, now called AG1.
Athletic Greens, AKA AG1,
is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink
that also has adaptogens and digestive enzymes.
I've been taking Athletic Greens since way back in 2012,
so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast.
The reason I started taking Athletic Greens
and the reason I still drink Athletic Greens twice a day
is that it supplies total foundational coverage
of my vitamin mineral needs,
and it supplies important nutrients
that I need to support my gut microbiome.
The gut microbiome, as many of you know,
supports the immune system.
It also supports the so-called gut-brain axis,
which is vital for mood,
for energy levels, for regulating focus,
and many other features of our mental health
and physical health that impact our daily performance
and high performance in any endeavors
we might be involved in.
If you'd like to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman
and claim a special offer.
They're giving away five free travel packs
plus a year supply of vitamin D3K2 with every order,
and of course, vitamin D3K2 are vital
for all sorts of things like hormone health
and metabolic health and K2 for cardiovascular health
and calcium regulation.
Again, you can go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman
to claim that special offer.
The second major effect that nicotine has in the brain
is that it increases acetylcholine.
Acetylcholine is a neuromodulator
that exists in you and me.
It is released from multiple sites in the brain,
and the two major sites are the nucleus basalis.
So these are a collection of neurons
in the front and base of your brain
and from some brain stem areas,
and there are a bunch of different ones back there
in your brain stem, which is indeed in the back,
that release acetylcholine.
That include the locus coeruleus as kind of a minor site,
the pedunculopontine nucleus.
There are a bunch of these different areas,
the parabigeminal nucleus.
There are a bunch of these things back there.
We don't have to go into all the names,
but just understand that there are little pockets
of neurons, nerve cells, located in the front and the back
and to some extent in the middle of your brain,
but really in the front and the back of your brain
that can serve two major roles.
Here they are.
Acetylcholine released from nucleus basalis
leads to a sort of spotlighting or highlighting
of particular neural circuits in the brain.
What do I mean by this?
Well, let's say you're working on a puzzle.
Let's say it's a cognitive puzzle.
Maybe you're doing a word puzzle,
or nowadays I've heard of this wordle thing.
I'm on Twitter and people are always posting
their wordle thing, and I have no idea what it is,
but I'm guessing it's some sort of puzzle.
I'm guessing it's like a crossword puzzle,
and here, if I'm wrong, I don't know, educate me.
Tell me what wordle is.
Somebody put it in the comments
and tell me if I should play it or not.
Here's the deal.
When acetylcholine is released from nucleus basalis,
the neurons are there in the base of the brain,
but they extend axons,
which are like little wires elsewhere in the brain,
and when acetylcholine is released,
it tends to be released at particular locations in the brain
that are associated with whatever activity
we happen to be doing.
So if I'm doing wordle,
here I'm talking about it as if I've ever done it,
doing a crossword puzzle or wordle,
well, the neurons that we're involved in
trying to figure out the solution to that wordle
or crossword puzzle are active,
and then acetylcholine is released from the little wires,
the little endings of these cells in nucleus basalis,
and all of a sudden, those neural circuits get a boost.
They become more active, and believe it or not,
our ability to perform that crossword puzzle,
or at least focus on that wordle or crossword puzzle,
gets enhanced.
It literally increases.
Our attention for that and not anything else is enhanced.
So it's literally like a neurochemical attentional spotlight.
Nicotine increases acetylcholine and thereby
focus and concentration and mental performance,
not by changing the neural circuits
that are activated per se,
but rather by making more acetylcholine available
at those release sites.
So it's as if the spotlighter got more intense.
The highlighter is more intense than it would be otherwise.
And I should also mention
because of the so-called pharmacokinetics,
the time course in which nicotine has its effects,
which are pretty short-lived,
talk about those in a moment,
this enhancement in cognitive performance and attention
is going to be very transient,
probably on the order of about 30, maybe 45 minutes.
The half-life of nicotine,
depending on how it's ingested
and whether or not you have food in the gut
and what else is in the bloodstream, et cetera,
it's going to be anywhere from one to two hours.
But typically the effects of nicotine will come on
in about two to 15 minutes, as I mentioned before,
and then will last anywhere from about 30 to 45 minutes.
This is why in the old days,
and still to some extent in certain areas of the world,
but less so in the United States
and certainly in Europe as well,
we don't see quite as many people smoking cigarettes
for reasons we can discuss later,
but you would see these chain smokers
who are trying to maintain constant levels
of nicotine in their brain and bloodstream.
Now, perhaps they didn't know
that nicotine has this one to two hour half-life,
but they could sense, no doubt,
the cognitive and the physical effects of nicotine,
including this cognitive enhancement effect
and highlighting of the neural circuits effect.
And they would notice, they would smoke a cigarette,
and then for the next five to 45 minutes
have heightened focus,
and then it would start to drop off,
so they smoke another cigarette.
So in other words, they're trying to maintain
a constant level of nicotine
for whatever activities they needed to perform.
Obviously chain smoking,
because of the terrible effects of smoking,
I'll talk about those terrible effects,
but I'm sure you've heard of them before,
cancer, depletion of just about every organ and body tissue
to the point that it can actually be measured
how many years of your life you're peeling off
in terms of lifespan and healthspan by smoking.
Well, the terrible effects of smoking are indisputable,
but the positive effects of nicotine on this circuitry
are part of the reason why people would chain smoke
in the first place,
rather than get one big peak of concentration and focus
and then just let it disappear after 45 minutes.
Okay, so what we have is a scenario
where dopamine is going up in the mesolimbic pathway.
That's why smoking or ingesting nicotine in any other way
feels good and makes us feel motivated.
And then the increase in acetylcholine,
especially from nucleus basalis in the front of the brain
is the reason why it can increase our ability
to focus on particular types of endeavors,
particular mental work that we're doing,
or maybe even particular physical work.
Although I should mention anytime I'm pairing
the words nicotine and physical work,
it's obvious that because of the ways
that smoking impairs lung function,
those two things really run counter to one another.
In other words, if you are thinking about ingesting nicotine
through smoking or vaping
in order to improve physical performance,
that's a terrible idea.
The logic isn't there
and the health detriments are certainly there.
The third neurochemical pathway that's strongly activated
when nicotine is brought into the central nervous system,
into the brain is epinephrine or in particular norepinephrine
which is related to epinephrine.
Now, earlier I said epinephrine is the same as adrenaline.
That's still true.
Norepinephrine is closely related to epinephrine.
And for today's discussion,
we're going to use them interchangeably.
Although I realize as I say that,
that the medical students and some biology students
are probably going to have a minor seizure
when I lump norepinephrine and epinephrine.
I don't do that to be too much of a lumper.
In science, we talk about lumpers and splitters.
Lumpers are people that like to oversimplify a little bit.
Splitters are people that really like to detail.
You'll see a lot of splitters on social media
from time to time.
They'll say, wait, you know,
you didn't mention the alpha-2 beta-6 receptor subunit.
Okay, look, I get it.
And I am all for having splitters in the room.
But for sake of today's discussion
and for ease of digestibility of some of this,
just want to point out that norepinephrine, epinephrine,
and adrenaline, I'm going to treat as a common pool
of similar, in fact, very similar molecules
that all have the same net effect,
at least in the context of this discussion.
And that's to increase levels of alertness,
energy, and arousal.
And the way that nicotine accomplishes those increases
in alertness and arousal and energy within the brain
is by triggering the release of norepinephrine
from a little cluster of neurons in the back of the brain
called locus coeruleus, tiny cluster of neurons
that offers up, or I should say has,
because they're always there from birth,
has these little wires, these axons that extend many,
many places in the brain, not every place,
but virtually every place and can sprinkler the brain
with norepinephrine and essentially serve
as a wake-up signal, elevating levels of energy.
And when that combines with the acetylcholine
from nucleus basalis,
which causes attentional spotlighting,
increases in concentration and focus,
and with the feel-good properties of dopamine
and the motivating properties of dopamine released
from the mesolimbic reward pathway,
now you can start to get a picture
of why nicotine is such a powerful molecule.
It's making people feel motivated and good.
It's making people feel focused
and it makes people feel alert
when they would otherwise feel a little bit sleepy.
So this is a really powerful compound.
In fact, going back to our earlier discussion
about focus and some tools for focus,
and I encourage you, if you're interested,
to please check out the episode on focus.
There are a number of different tools
and protocols there to increase focus,
but here we're talking about one molecule, nicotine,
found in plants like tomatoes and potatoes
and the tobacco plant,
and it can be synthesized in a laboratory
and ingested through a patch or a gum or even a pill
or a toothpick dipped in nicotine.
One molecule that can trigger activation
of all the circuits for focus and motivation
in one fell swoop.
That is remarkable.
That is absolutely remarkable.
And here we haven't even touched
on some of the psychological components of focus, right?
Whether or not we're interested in something,
whether or not we're excited about it or not.
This is a very, very powerful system.
So powerful, in fact,
that I think we can really place nicotine right up there
at the top, right next to caffeine
as the molecule that has fundamentally changed
human evolution, human consciousness, and human experience.
Even if you're somebody who's never ingested nicotine,
this absolutely has to be true
because you have these nicotinic receptors,
which is to say that acetylcholine that's naturally released
without any external trigger within your brain and body,
or I should say without any trigger from nicotine
in particular,
is binding these nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
and is creating these effects in your brain and body.
It's just absolutely staggering.
Now, earlier I mentioned the appetite suppressing
and indeed metabolism increasing effects of nicotine.
And while that's a fairly niche component
of what nicotine does, I mean, it's an important one,
but it's not the major reason
why most people consume nicotine.
I'd like to take a moment and talk about that now
because we are in the brain
and we're talking about the effects of nicotine in the brain
and so it seems to me the appropriate time
to talk about this.
Now, we can have this conversation about nicotine
and appetite and metabolism
in a very simple and straightforward way.
If you'd like to learn more about the biology of metabolism
and appetite and how those things are mediated
by neural components,
so not just stuff like your liver, et cetera,
we have episodes on that,
but really the neural components of hunger and appetite.
I encourage you to check out our episode
on hunger and appetite.
But in that episode, we had a discussion
and it's one that I'll just briefly summarize now
that you have a collection of neurons
that sits right above the roof of your mouth or so
called the hypothalamus.
Hypo means below and thalamus is right above it,
hypothalamus.
So the small collection of neurons in the hypothalamus
do a number of different things related to sex behavior,
aggression, mediating the temperature of your body, et cetera,
but also appetite and suppressing appetite.
And within the hypothalamus,
there's a compact collection of these little neurons,
which are referred to as the POMC, P-O-M-C neurons.
And the name comes from the fact
that they express certain peptides
and we won't get into that now,
but the POMC neurons have a very profound impact
on whether or not you feel hungry
or whether or not you do not feel hungry,
whether or not your appetite is suppressed.
It turns out that when nicotine gets into the bloodstream
and then into the brain,
some of that nicotine binds to nicotinic alpha-4 beta-2
containing nicotinic receptors.
Again, these subunits are receptors,
but basically the nicotine binds
to one of those parking spots, parks there.
And as a consequence, these POMC, P-O-M-C neurons
increase their electrical activity
and appetite is suppressed.
And that's because the POMC neurons have outputs
to various areas of the brain and body
controlling everything from how full we feel
to whether or not our blood sugar goes up or down,
which can impact our hunger.
And believe it or not,
whether or not we have a tendency
to want to move the jaw of our mouth in order to chew food.
Yes, believe it or not,
the neural circuitry associated with appetite
and suppression of appetite
actually dictates whether or not you prefer to,
or I should say are more biased or less biased
to moving your mouth, that is chewing,
which makes perfect sense when you hear it, right?
One way to suppress appetite is to sew the jaw shut neurally
or at least make it less likely to open your mouth
and put food in it.
Actually, that reminds me of a story.
I'll just interrupt myself to tell a brief story,
that there's a famous Nobel Laureate
who won the Nobel Prize
for something totally distant from appetite,
but once turned to a friend of mine at a meeting and said,
I discovered the biological mechanism for losing weight.
And my friend said, well, of course,
it's a ingest fewer calories than you burn, right?
Calories in, calories out,
fundamental rule of thermodynamics
and basically the fundamental rule
of weight loss, weight gain, or weight maintenance.
And he said, no, it's actually the gene
that controls whether or not you open your mouth.
Now he was making a very nerdy joke.
So if you didn't register that as a joke,
that's about as funny as neuroscience or biology jokes get.
There are a couple of funnier ones,
but that one's kind of considered on the funnier side.
So this is why we're not considered comedians.
But the point of the matter is that
whether or not you crave or desire
or impulsively want to put things in your mouth and chew it
will actually dictate how many calories that you eat.
And so I find it remarkable and indeed important to know
that these POMC neurons are actually inhibiting
the opening and the movement of the mouth for chewing.
So when we smoke or when we ingest nicotine
in any other way, you activate these POMC neurons,
you suppress appetite, but in part,
you do that by actually limiting the impulse to chew.
Incredible, at least to me.
Now, in addition to limiting appetite
by changing one's desire to ingest food and chew it
and actual craving of food
by regulation of blood sugar, et cetera,
there do seem to be some quite direct effects
of nicotine on metabolism.
And the effects on metabolism aren't enormous.
These are increases in metabolism
that are about 2% up to about 5%.
But I want to emphasize that those are transient increases
in metabolism.
Nonetheless, people that quit smoking often find
that their appetite goes up.
They sometimes gain weight.
They sometimes do not, depending on whether or not
they offset that increase in appetite
with increased physical exercise
or with decreased food intake in other ways.
But there does seem to be this direct effect
of ingesting nicotine on metabolism,
which I find is interesting
because if you look in the literature,
one of the reasons why people are reluctant
to quit ingesting nicotine,
if for instance, they want to quit using the delivery device
to nicotine that's causing such problems for their health,
like smoking or vaping,
or whether or not they find themselves quote unquote
addicted to or have the habit of ingesting nicotine,
in part that's likely due to be the dopamine effects, right?
Because dopamine is highly reinforcing and rewarding.
It feels good, so people want to do more of it.
But it's also that for many people,
and here the data really points to the fact
that a lot of the younger female smokers
or younger female vapers,
or when I say that, of course,
I mean younger females that vape are doing that
because they like the appetite suppressing effects,
which of course opens up an entire conversation
about the sociology of body imagery, et cetera,
a topic for a future podcast.
Okay, so nicotine has certain effects on the brain
by virtue of the fact that nicotine binds
these nicotinic acetylcholine receptors,
and those receptors are found on some,
but not all neural circuits within the brain.
And we talked about some of them already,
mesolimbic, the POMC neurons, et cetera.
Now, when we ingest nicotine,
it goes from the bloodstream
to all the tissues and organs of the body.
How does it do that?
I mean, amazing.
It can pass to everything, the brain, the body.
It does that because nicotine is fat soluble.
And now when anytime people hear the word fat,
they tend to think about body fat, subcutaneous fat,
or maybe they think about dietary fat.
What I mean by fat soluble in the context
of nicotine being fat soluble is that the cells
of your body have an outer layer, so-called outer membrane,
and it's made up of lipid, of fat,
very particular types of lipids in fact.
Nicotine has this remarkable ability
to move through that fatty tissue.
Not all molecules have that ability, but nicotine does.
So it can move relatively freely through the brain and body
and relatively freely from outside of cells,
extracellular space to intracellular space.
So it can get into cells.
It can do that with the brain.
We talked about those effects
and it can do that within the body.
Now, anytime we're talking about the body,
we can be talking about any number of things,
but today I'm going to refer to the periphery and the body
in more or less the same way,
but keep in mind in the back of your head, pun intended,
you have your brain, your eyes, and the spinal cord,
and those three things make up your central nervous system.
The peripheral nervous system and the periphery,
which is the rest of your body,
that contain your organs and so forth
outside of the nervous system,
things like your liver and your stomach, et cetera,
that's what we're going to talk about now,
because nicotine has profound effects
on the organs of the body that are separate from,
but that occur in parallel at the same time
as the effects of nicotine on the brain.
So let's talk about what some of those effects are.
When nicotine makes it into the bloodstream,
again, within two to 15 minutes of ingesting it,
depending on the delivery device,
your heart rate will increase,
blood pressure will increase,
and the contractibility of the heart tissue
will actually increase.
So what that essentially speaks to
is an increase in so-called sympathetic tone.
And when I say that, I don't mean an increase in sympathy
for others of the emotional sort.
What I mean is an increase in the sympathetic activity
of the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system,
which is a real mouthful and mindful of ideas,
but all you need to know is that it's a generalized system
that increases levels of alertness and physical readiness.
So it makes you ready for action,
makes you ready for thought.
It's balanced by a whole other system
called the parasympathetic nervous system,
which is basically the so-called rest and digest system,
which is a system of neurons and organs, et cetera,
that put your body and your brain into a state
of not being able to think clearly,
to digest and to fall asleep.
Okay, so nicotine increases heart rate, blood pressure,
and contractibility of the heart.
So it's going to cause more blood flow in theory,
although it also tends to constrict blood vessels
in many locations in the body.
This explains the decrease in penile girth effect
of nicotine, in particular,
nicotine ingested by smoking or vaping.
That's right, smoking and vaping reduces penis size,
and also will have damaging effects
on the bloodlining endothelial tissue.
So over time, it actually is impairing blood's ability
to get to the penis chronically,
as well as to other organs of the body.
But when people ingest nicotine acutely,
and let's say they do that by Nicorette patch
or by toothpick dipped in nicotine,
it will have some of these same effects.
But when not smoking tobacco,
when bringing nicotine into the bloodstream
through other mechanisms,
many, if not all of the disruption
of the endothelial cell function can be bypassed.
But the effects on penile girth,
the effects on reducing blood flow to various tissues
is still present during the effects of nicotine,
which as I mentioned, last about one to two hours.
The half-life is about one to two hours,
depending on the number of factors.
Not interesting for today's discussion.
So when nicotine gets into the bloodstream,
it's making us more alert.
It's preparing our body for readiness.
The heart is pumping harder.
Epinephrine, that is adrenaline,
is released from the adrenal glands,
which ride atop our kidneys.
So everything is pointed toward creating more readiness
to move, more readiness to think.
And again, this is happening in parallel
with all the effects of neurochemistry
that are happening with the brain
that we talked about a few minutes ago.
And what's interesting about nicotine
is that while it causes this global increase in readiness
and alertness and attention and mood, et cetera,
it also has the effect of somewhat relaxing skeletal muscle.
Now that might seem counterintuitive
to those of you out there that already know,
what I'm about to tell the rest of you
who didn't know it previously,
that your muscles are able to contract
because of the effects of acetylcholine
released from neurons in your spinal cord
that spit out acetylcholine onto the muscle
and bind to what?
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, put into plain English,
nicotinic receptors are also the ways
in which your muscles can get activated.
So therefore, why would it be that increasing nicotine
would cause relaxation of the muscles?
And that has to do with some of the neural circuits
that are upstream of the muscles.
And it has to do with a little bit
of how the autonomic nervous system
is arranged in terms of which receptors go where.
A topic and kind of rabbit hole of conversation,
far too deep for right now,
at least in the context of this already
somewhat detailed discussion of the effects of nicotine.
But if we were to zoom out
and just think about the effects of nicotine,
we now have a very clear picture.
Reward pathways are turned on, attention is turned on,
alertness is turned on.
You feel better than you felt a few minutes ago.
Your blood pressure is up.
Your heart rate is up.
Your preparedness for thinking is elevated as well.
And yet your body is somewhat relaxed.
That's a very interesting state of mind and body.
Interesting because it's somewhat ideal for cognitive work.
If you were going to sit down and work on a book,
or you're going to sit down
and try and figure out a hard math problem,
or you're going to write a letter
that's been really challenging for you to write,
or maybe that you're really excited to write,
but that you've been slow to get out the door
for whatever reason.
Here I'm talking about my own habits of procrastination.
Well, that state of being very alert
but your body being relaxed
is almost if not the optimal state
for getting mental work done.
Because if you're feeling agitated in your body
and you want to physically move your body,
it's very hard to do cognitive work,
at least the sorts of cognitive work
that involve typing or writing or these sorts of things.
It's also the exact opposite of the optimal state
for physical performance,
which is one of, yes, also alertness.
Yes, also motivation and elevated mood.
That's all wonderful stuff to have in mind, literally,
when you are exercising or competing in sport
or something of that sort.
But under those conditions,
you really also want to have a fast reaction time,
a low latency for muscle activation
so that you can make coordinated muscle movements
in the ways that you need to,
which is of course what's required of physical endeavors.
That tells us a few things.
First of all, it tells us that nicotine
is going to be generally a bad idea
for a pre-workout tool
or for enhancing physical performance.
However, it's apt to be, and in fact is,
an excellent tool for enhancing cognitive ability.
And of course, that triggers my mind
to return to the anecdote
about my Nobel Prize-winning colleague
who ingests nicotine by way of nicotine-containing gum
in order to increase levels of cognitive focus,
certainly not for going out and playing sport.
In fact, despite the fact that he is very, very tall,
he often points to himself in an appropriately funny way
that despite being on the basketball team of his high school
he's probably the worst player that ever existed
and they only positioned him there because of his height.
And I guess his head was designed
to prevent balls from entering the basket.
In any event, nicotine does seem to be very good
at enhancing cognitive function, at least in the short term,
which is not to say that it isn't without its side effects,
which we will talk about.
And again, those are side effects
that are independent of smoking or vaping
or other forms of ingesting nicotine.
For instance, dipping or chewing tobacco
is known to cause a 50-fold, yes, five zero,
50-fold increase in mouth cancers, things like leukoplakia
and just generally is terrible for your health.
I'm sorry to break it to you, but if you're dipping
or you're using snuff or things of that sort,
certainly I'm not going to tell people what to do.
That's not my role in life,
but you are dramatically increasing the probability
of an oral cancer or of a mucosal lining cancer
of some sort.
So it's not just that smoking and vaping
are bad for your health.
These other forms of delivery from nicotine
can be bad for your health as well.
And whether or not ingesting nicotine
by way of nicotine containing gum or patch or toothpick
or other method is dangerous.
For other reasons is a discussion that's important.
Right now, it appears that provided the dosages
are kept reasonable,
and we'll talk about what reasonable means a little later,
and the frequency is kept relatively low,
so not relying on these things constantly,
there may in fact be some benefit to ingesting nicotine
from time to time,
provided that you are not still developing your brain.
Now, in reality,
neuroplasticity goes on throughout the lifetime.
Your life is actually one long developmental arc.
It's not only development occurs and then stops,
but certainly for people before puberty, during puberty,
and probably for the next 15 to 20 years after puberty,
avoiding nicotine is probably a good idea.
Now, of course, development is your entire life.
It's not like development starts and then ends,
but certainly for people that are 25 years old or younger,
ingesting nicotine as a way to enhance cognitive function
is probably not the best idea.
And certainly, please,
for those of you that are 15 years old or younger,
ingesting nicotine in any form,
unless it's prescribed by your doctor
for a very specific clinical reason,
to me seems just like a terrible idea
based on all the data that I've read.
And the reason for that is it's going to create a scenario
of nicotine dependence in order to achieve heightened levels
of mood and alertness, et cetera, and that's bad.
And what we're effectively talking about
is an addiction for nicotine directly,
not necessarily the delivery device method
like smoking or vaping, although it could pull that in
as an addictive or habit-forming behavior as well.
But you want to let your neural circuits develop
to the point where, again,
unless there's a clinical need for a prescribed drug
from a licensed physician or psychiatrist, et cetera,
that you're not relying on chemical enhancement
of these circuits.
For people who are 25 years or older,
and again, that's not a strict cutoff,
but roughly 25 years or older,
but for those of you that are thinking about using nicotine
to enhance cognitive function as adults
and your brain development is slowing down, right?
Never ceases, but it's slowing down
or has slowed down to the point
where we would say developmental plasticity is largely over
and you're now operating
in the context of adult neuroplasticity.
Well, in that case, there may be instances
in which increasing acetylcholine, dopamine, et cetera,
by way of nicotine ingestion might be a good idea,
but certainly not by smoking, vaping,
or by direct contact of tobacco
to the mucosal lining tissue of the mouth or nose,
so-called dipping or snuffing.
For the last 20 minutes or so,
we've been talking about the biology
of nicotine specifically, how it impacts the brain,
how it impacts the body, why it feels so good,
why it can enhance focus.
And we've largely set aside smoking, vaping,
dipping tobacco, and snuffing,
and the negative effects that those all have
on mental and physical health.
Working down from the top of the head
to the bottom of the feet,
we can say that smoking, vaping, dipping, and snuffing
negatively impact every organ and tissue system
and cell of the body by virtue of the fact
that they all damage the endothelial cells.
Again, the endothelial cells are the cells
that make up the vasculature,
which delivers blood and other nutrients
to all the cells and organs and tissues of the body.
And those endothelial cells are strongly
and negatively impacted by all of the practices
that I just described.
Now, the way that that happens varies a little bit
from each one to the next.
For instance, it has been estimated
that cigarettes contain anywhere
from 4,000 to 7,000 toxins.
Now, the word toxins is a real buzzword these days.
You hear about detoxes and toxins,
but more specifically, we know that it contains carcinogens.
These are cancer promoting compounds.
For instance, we know that the tar in cigarettes,
even low tar cigarettes,
as well as the ammonia within cigarettes,
as well as the formaldehyde contained within cigarettes,
as well as the carbon dioxide that's generated
from smoking those cigarettes are all carcinogens.
Carbon dioxide also has the negative effect
of depleting the amount of oxygen that's delivered
to any and all of our tissues
by way of the impact of carbon dioxide,
binding hemoglobin and preventing hemoglobin
from delivering oxygen to the tissues of the body.
So while there may be 4,000 or 4,500 or 7,000 toxins,
depending on which cigarette,
which papers they happen to be rolled in,
whether or not they're filtered or non-filtered,
the type of tobacco, et cetera, et cetera,
there are a tremendous number of toxins
and there are some very potent carcinogens
within that long list of toxins.
Again, ammonia, tar, formaldehyde and carbon dioxide
being the most potent of those carcinogens.
Now, the fact that there are carcinogens in cigarettes
sometimes leads cigarette smokers
and particularly the cigarette smokers
that have the hardest time quitting
or that enjoy their cigarettes the most from saying,
well, listen, everything is a carcinogen
or everything kills you.
Well, certainly that's not a true statement.
And while there are other carcinogens in the environment,
so environmental hazards like solvents
and even if you work in a laboratory, for instance,
we use in the laboratory DNA intercalating dyes.
These are literally dyes that allow us
to see the DNA structure of cells
and see the proteins they make
and see the RNAs they make.
And it's very important to wear gloves
when you work with those things
because as the name suggests, they intercalate,
they actually get in between the strands of DNA
and separate them.
They are mutagens, they mutate DNA.
They are often carcinogens as well.
So we have them in our laboratory,
but we take certain precautions
to not have them negatively impact our health,
safety protocols and so on.
We hear that there are carcinogens in car exhaust
and bus exhaust and in all sorts of things like pesticides.
And that's all true.
So in the argument of probabilities, one would say,
well, if there are all these other carcinogens
in the environment,
why would you compound their carcinogenic effect
by smoking or vaping or dipping or snuffing?
But that usually doesn't get people to quit smoking
or doing those things
because of the powerful reinforcing effects
of nicotine itself.
So again, nicotine is the reinforcing element
by way of triggering that dopamine reinforcement pathway,
the mesolimbic reward pathway.
And of course there are all the other additional effects
of increased focus,
such as increased ability to pay attention to work
or to others that lead to other rewards.
And so then it becomes a situation of compounding reward.
So it's not really about the cigarette,
it's about the nicotine.
And it's not really about the nicotine,
it's about the dopamine that the nicotine evokes.
And then it's not really about the dopamine
that the nicotine evokes directly per se,
but also about all the positive effects
that that increased dopamine results in.
So we can easily circle back to the negative effects
of smoking, vaping, dipping, and snuffing
and say the endothelial cells are disrupted.
The endothelial cells are involved in delivery of blood
and other nutrients to every tissue of the body
and smoking, vaping, dipping, and snuffing
contain carcinogens, which are cancer promoting.
And because the epidemiological studies are out there,
we can actually arrive at some very clear numbers
as to how much life one will lose
from ingesting nicotine by way of those four delivery
devices, or I should say any one
of those four delivery devices.
Although I should also mention that many people
who are vaping are also smoking cigarettes,
this is becoming increasingly common.
A lot of people are using vaping in one context
and cigarettes in another,
dipping in one context, vaping in another.
But even for those that only smoke or only vape
or only dip or only snuff,
the negative effects are dramatic and calculable.
So it is thought that for every pack of cigarettes
consumed per day, so you could average that out
if you're a two a day cigarette smoker
or a pack a day cigarette smoker or two pack a day,
for every pack of cigarettes smoked per day,
we can reliably estimate a 14 year reduction in lifespan.
So cigarettes are literally peeling years off your life.
Now, because of the way that the brain works
and the way that human beings anticipate the future
and can be grounded both in the present and the future
or the present and the past,
that's just how the mind works, right?
That's why we can think about the future,
but also realize where we are in time and space today.
Because of that, many people will say,
well, I enjoy cigarettes or I enjoy vaping.
And so at least while I'm here, I'm enjoying it.
And that's because the dopamine system is not very good
at understanding opportunity costs.
That is what we would be doing in those 14 years
and what we would be enjoying.
And the enrichment that we would get
if we were to live into those 14 years.
So at some level, the smoker, the vapor is being rational
when they say, yeah, but I enjoy this.
And so the years lost, I can't really register that
because it's hard to register what you don't have
and what you've never had, right?
On the other hand, we can also point to the statistic
that there is this 50 fold increase in mouth cancers
from dipping and there are nasal cancers as well
that are greatly increased by snuffing.
And from smoking, and now we know based on data from vaping
that the endothelial cell damage and the direct effects
of damage to the lungs from TARS.
And even if people are vaping,
which tends to have lower TARS than do cigarettes,
even for people that are vaping,
greatly increased probability of stroke,
of peripheral vascular disease.
So this is peripheral pain because remember,
blood is delivering not just blood, but other nutrients
and it's clearing things out from tissues.
So there's an accumulation of literally toxins and debris
that cells generate all the time, which is healthy,
but then normally is cleared away by the endothelial cells
and by other cell types of the immune system.
That's all increased in people that engage
in these nicotine delivery device behaviors.
Rates of heart attack, rates of stroke,
rates of cognitive decline are all increased.
Now you might say cognitive decline,
I thought that nicotine increases the likelihood
that we can maintain healthy neuronal function
and cognitive capacity.
It might even increase cognitive capacity in a potent way
in the short term, and indeed it does.
However, cigarette smoking and vaping are now known
to dramatically decrease cognitive function
because one of the key things about the brain
is that it is the most metabolically demanding organ,
which means it consumes a lot of glucose.
Or even if you're ketogenic, you need ketones,
you need nutrients getting to the neurons
and other cell types of the brain and nervous system
in order for it to function properly.
And when you disrupt the vasculature
through this endothelial cell dysfunction,
you got things like interstitial,
which just means in the spaces between dysfunction.
So it's not just beating up the endothelial cells themselves
but the spaces between the cells is being disrupted.
There's a lot of debris that accumulates there.
And as a consequence,
the brain just simply will not function as well.
So you start getting short-term memory lapses,
you start getting working memory lapses.
Working memory is a sort of memory
if someone tells you their seven digit phone number,
typically nowadays people just share their info,
but seven digit phone number or a sequence of numbers
or an address and your inability to remember that.
So you're walking back to the kitchen sink
and you can't remember what you were trying to remember
just a short moment ago, that's working memory.
Working memory suffers long-term memory,
projective or interrogate memories into the future.
How can you remember things in the future
that haven't occurred yet?
Well, this is more of a memory for future plans
or ideas and planning for things that are to come.
So what we can very reliably say is that currently
more than 1 billion, billion,
more than 1 billion people consume tobacco
in order to get their nicotine,
because that's really the reinforcing element within tobacco.
More than 1 billion people consume tobacco
in the form of cigarettes every day.
A growing number of people,
more than half a billion people now are starting to vape.
The estimates range from 200 million to 500 million.
And there's a lot of debate about this
because a lot of people are hybrid smokers and vapers,
meaning they do one or both,
depending on time of day and location,
as I mentioned before.
But now you start to see how you can get to the number
that billions of people are consuming tobacco,
because of course you also have your people
that are dipping and your people that are snuffing.
And as I mentioned before,
you have people that are engaging
in multiple of these behaviors.
So billions of people on planet earth,
anywhere from one eighth to a quarter of human beings,
incredible, right?
Anywhere from one eighth to a quarter of human beings
are consuming tobacco in one form or another
in order to get their nicotine one way or another.
And as a consequence are peeling ears off their life,
dramatically increasing the probability of cancer, stroke,
heart attack, peripheral neuropathies, brain dysfunction,
meaning cognitive dysfunction,
memory impairment, sexual dysfunction.
There are a number of studies
that have looked at increases in cortisol,
and while minor, those increases do exist,
decreases in growth hormone,
and while minor, those decreases exist.
But even setting aside the negative impact on endocrine,
on hormone factors, it's very, very clear
that smoking, vaping, dipping, and snuffing
are among the worst things that we can do for our health.
They are among the leading causes of preventable death
and debilitating life conditions,
which may lead you to the question
as to why in the world would people do this?
Well, it turns out most of them don't want to.
In the best surveys that one can find
of if you could quit smoking,
if you could quit vaping, would you?
What you find is that at least for cigarette smokers,
70%, seven zero, want to quit.
They would love to quit,
and yet they find that to be exceedingly difficult.
And the reason they find it to be exceedingly difficult
is because of all the brain neurochemistry
that we talked about before.
The reason I spent close to 20 minutes
talking about dopamine in the mesolimbic pathway,
acetylcholine in the nucleus basalis,
and epinephrine and the relaxation of muscles
in the periphery and the increase in readiness
in the body and brain is that all of those combined
to make nicotine one of the most powerful
and potent cognitive enhancers,
and to some extent, physical enhancer,
although, as I mentioned before,
the total number of physical exercise
or physical sport promoting effects of nicotine
is very, very small, if not zero.
There are certain conditions
under which one might imagine using nicotine
specifically for cognitive enhancement
where performance of complex motor skills
would sort of outweigh the negative effects
on the neuromuscular system,
our ability to generate coordinated movements.
There's actually an excellent study
looking at the effects of nicotine,
not by smoking delivery,
but by a different delivery mechanism
in which they looked at performance of hitters in baseball.
The experiment was kind of an interesting one.
Even though these were fairly skilled baseball players,
what they had them do was hit a ball off a tee.
As I recall growing up, and admittedly,
I didn't play much baseball,
but you start off on tee ball and then you would go,
I think it was to pitching machine,
then they would use actual pitchers who throw the ball.
But in this case,
it was a couple of different baseball-related tasks.
They'd have people hit the ball off a tee,
but they had to direct that hit
toward a ball atop another tee.
So it's fairly precise targeting that's required
in order to knock that ball off the other tee.
So this is an activity that involves not just motor output,
but coordinated motor output,
and not just coordinated motor output,
but directed coordinated output that requires some,
as we would say, top-down processing, right?
This isn't the kind of thing that can be done reflexively.
This is the kind of thing where the forebrain,
the prefrontal cortex in particular
has to be heavily involved
in order to suppress certain actions
and then create other actions.
So the basic takeaway of the study
is that nicotine delivered by way of nicotine gum,
not by smoking, dipping, or snuffing,
was able to increase cognitive performance and motor output.
So a rare circumstance where a specific set of demands
that involve both cognitive engagement
and physical engagement
showed a slight but significant improvement.
But again, in most cases,
nicotine is just simply not going to improve physical output
if it's delivered through a smoked cigarette,
through vaping, through dipping, or through snuffing.
So if all these behaviors are terrible
for essentially every aspect of our health, frankly,
I mean, when you look at the literature,
it's terrible for pregnant women.
It's terrible for kids.
It's terrible for older people.
It's terrible for younger people.
I mean, you really cannot find a scenario
in which smoking, vaping, dipping, or snuffing
are good for us.
And yet people like the effects on the brain
and they feel quite addicted to them,
even if they say they're not.
Most of those people would be unwilling to give up
their practice of nicotine delivery
for more than a few hours.
In fact, if you look at the effects of withdrawal,
and we are going to talk about what withdrawal
of nicotine looks like, what you find is that
as soon as four hours after the last ingestion of nicotine
by way of cigarette or vaping or dipping or snuffing,
what people start to experience is some agitation,
craving for nicotine, of course.
And while craving is kind of a vague concept,
it's actually a very specific biological mechanism.
It's the drop in dopamine that's starting to occur,
so much so that there's a drop in dopamine below baseline.
That is the increase in dopamine
that would normally be experienced from smoking, vaping,
dipping, or snuffing is now not happening.
And in fact, the levels of dopamine are dropping
below where they would have been
even without performing that behavior.
So that's what craving is,
and withdrawal is an increased sense of that craving,
as well as a lot of negative stuff like stomach aches
or nausea or irritability,
and often collections of all of those.
So because these nicotine delivery approaches
are so terrible for our health,
and also because as many as 70% of people who smoke
would like to quit, but either feel they can't
because they've tried and failed repeatedly often,
or because it's just too scary,
meaning the reinforcing properties are too strong
and therefore they can't imagine living without them,
or the withdrawal effects are too strong
and they can't imagine living with those,
well then is there hope for quitting smoking,
vaping, snuffing, or dipping?
And the short answer, fortunately, is yes.
There are excellent ways to do that,
and some of them are single event treatments.
And we're going to talk about those shortly.
But before we do that,
I want to highlight one very brief point,
which is that nicotine is not the cause of cancer.
Nicotine is not the carcinogen.
It's the other things in tobacco
or associated with the nicotine delivery device
that are causing cancer,
and I should mention the other negative impacts
on our health in particular
by way of disrupted endothelial blood vessel function.
Now that leads us to this issue of vaping,
because as many of you know, and probably are thinking
as I've been delivering this information,
people don't vape tobacco.
The way that vaping pens are designed
is that it includes some liquid, it involves heat,
and it does not involve the burning off of tobacco.
In fact, there's a constant updating
of the engineering of these vape pens
so that they can be very low heat.
In some cases, they use even non-heating approaches
to vaporize the nicotine
and allow it to enter the bloodstream very quickly.
I must say in a lot of ways, vaping resembles crack cocaine.
The reason why vaping and crack cocaine are so similar
is the speed of entry of nicotine into the bloodstream.
This isn't an episode about cocaine,
but I just want to very briefly touch
on some of the delivery routes for cocaine
because they parallel a lot of the delivery routes
for nicotine, and we can learn a lot
about drug pharmacokinetics and dopamine
if we look at the parallels between cocaine and nicotine.
I'll preface this by saying cocaine is a terrible drug.
It is actually a schedule II drug in the United States,
which means that it has a very, very limited
yet still present medical application,
mainly as an anesthetic in certain laboratory
and hospital conditions.
But aside from that, it's very clear
that cocaine is one of the most debilitating drugs
that humans can use because of the way
that it impacts the dopamine system.
And it basically creates a loop whereby the only thing
that can really trigger dopamine release is cocaine.
And as I've said before, the way that I define addiction
is it's a progressive narrowing of the things
that bring people pleasure.
Cocaine certainly falls into the category
of addictive drugs, strongly addictive drugs.
And in fact, it has the additionally pernicious feature
that after using cocaine for some period of time,
the amount of dopamine that's released
becomes progressively lower and lower and lower
so that people can never get back to a state
in which dopamine release is ever as great
as it was the first time they did cocaine
or prior to doing cocaine.
Now, with a long period of no cocaine use whatsoever
and protecting the dopamine system
in a number of different ways, people can often,
not always, but often recover their dopamine system,
if not completely, then near completely.
So by all means, if you have a problem with cocaine, quit,
find a way to quit, get treatment,
get over that one way or another.
We have an episode with an expert guest, Dr. Anna Lemke,
who's a physician and the chief
of the Stanford School of Medicine
Dual Diagnosis Addiction Clinic.
She's a world expert in dopamine and addictive substances
and addictions of all kinds.
You can find that episode at Hubermanlab.com.
It's filled with information about how to get over
different types of addictions, including cocaine addiction.
Also check out her absolutely phenomenal
and indeed important book, Dopamine Nation,
which touches on some of this as well.
And in the show note captions for the episode
where Dr. Lemke was my guest,
you can also find some additional resources related to that.
So cocaine is terrible.
That needs to be acknowledged.
It should be avoided and you should find a way
to quit it if you are currently using.
With that said, the delivery mechanism for cocaine
strongly parallels the delivery mechanisms for nicotine.
That is people will snort cocaine,
which is a lot like snuffing or dipping.
That is when people snort cocaine,
they're bringing cocaine into proximity or into contact
really with the mucosal lining of the nasal passages,
which then allows the psychoactive substances
to permeate into the bloodstream.
Very seldom do people eat it,
although that does happen from time to time.
People will inject it, then a so-called main lining,
which is a very rapid entry into the bloodstream
because it's direct application to the bloodstream
by way of injection.
And then there's crack cocaine,
which is essentially like a vaporizing of the cocaine
from a so-called cocaine rock
that somewhat resembles vaping of nicotine.
So while the vape pen involves a liquid
that sold a cartridge that contains nicotine
and often other flavors as well,
flavorings I should say,
both crack cocaine and vaping cause very rapid increases
in the relative substances that are psychoactive.
In the case of cocaine, that would be cocaine
and the increase in dopamine in the brain and body,
I should mention.
And in the case of vaping,
there's a very rapid increase in blood concentrations
of nicotine, much faster than occur with cigarette smoking
or other modes of nicotine delivery.
So that speed of onset turns out to be a critical parameter
because the speed of onset of nicotine
is going to also determine the speed of release of dopamine
in the nucleus accumbens and ventral tegmental area,
that mesolimbic reward pathway.
And with the mesolimbic reward pathway,
it's not just about the peak,
meaning the maximal amount of dopamine that's released,
but it's the time course, how steep the curve is,
how quickly that dopamine increases,
that's going to determine how reinforcing,
how habit forming and indeed how addictive
a particular substance is.
So one of the major important differences
between vaping and cigarette smoking
is that the onset of dopamine release from vaping is faster.
And even a subtle increase in the rate
at which dopamine increases in the mesolimbic reward pathway
can make a given amount of nicotine
much more habit forming and addictive.
This probably explains the fact that many, many more people
in particular young people, age 25 and younger
are vaping at phenomenal rates now.
People are starting to vape in just about everywhere.
You see this in restaurants, you see it on the street.
Indeed, you even see it in the classroom.
This has actually become sort of sport of sorts.
It's certainly not something I encourage.
In fact, when I learned about this from a college student,
new college student,
he's telling me that many college students
are actually bringing vape pens into the classroom.
I think this is also happening in high schools
and even junior high schools.
This is a really concerning practice.
And here, I'm not trying to come across
as the anti-vaping crusader,
but I must say given the negative effects
on one's health in the longterm,
but also given these exceedingly powerful reward properties
of nicotine entering the bloodstream quickly
and dopamine being released very quickly
from the mesolimbic reward pathway,
what we're seeing out there makes total sense.
Young people's brains are essentially getting wired
to the expectation that dopamine
is going to be increased dramatically and quickly
under their control,
except it's under their control
only in a very narrow set of circumstances.
Recall the definition of addiction,
a progressive narrowing of the things
that bring you pleasure.
We can change that statement
to also say a progressive narrowing and specific kinetics,
that is specific time course
of the things that bring you pleasure.
Now that's a bit of a nerdier statement
than a progressive narrowing of the things
that bring you pleasure,
but what we're going to see in the next few years, I believe,
is an entire generation of young people
for which a very large percentage of them
are going to be seeking out a pattern or feeling,
because to the person taking it,
they're not looking at their dopamine levels
rising in their blood,
they're experiencing this as an increase in focus,
an increase in alertness,
an increase in mood and wellbeing
that is very rapid, very dramatic,
and that simply cannot be recreated
by any other substance,
and that's a very concerning scenario,
concerning because that mesolimbic reward pathway
is the only pathway,
the only pathway by which you can achieve
the rewarding properties of any kind of endeavor,
not just vaping, of course,
it is the way in which people achieve satisfaction
from reaching a relationship goal or an athletic goal
or an educational goal,
any kind of goal or sense of satisfaction,
and so it comes as no surprise
that vaping is strongly associated
with increased levels of depression,
especially when vaping use drops off,
why would that be?
If people are getting so much more dopamine
so much more quickly from vaping,
shouldn't they be feeling better?
That brings us back to the critical,
and I should say defining feature
of the dopamine reward pathway
for motivation and wellbeing,
which is that initially a given substance will cause,
let's say an eight out of 10, again, arbitrary units,
but eight out of 10 increase in dopamine,
but with repeated use,
what ends up happening is that even at similar
or higher levels of ingestion,
so not just one inhalation a minute,
but maybe two inhalations a minute
or inhalation every 30 seconds,
now it's level four out of 10 activation of dopamine
and then three and then two,
and eventually it drops below baseline.
Now the whole system can be recovered by abstinence
from nicotine consumption,
but the dopamine system is applied to everything,
all sense of wellbeing, all sense of motivation.
So during the period in which one is abstaining
from nicotine and vaping in particular,
people do not feel good, they feel miserable,
that's why it's called withdrawal,
it's associated with a bunch of psychological
and physiological symptoms that all lead back
to trying to get to the same levels of dopamine release
in the same patterns that were experienced
when one initially started vaping.
So I'm not trying to paint a dark picture here,
but frankly, the picture is very dark.
I'm very concerned about a practice of ingesting something
that powerfully modulates the dopamine system
with the sorts of kinetics that one sees
from ingestion of crack cocaine in young people
that has all these other negative health effects
that in the short term is very powerfully rewarding,
increased focus, wellbeing, et cetera,
but that over a very brief period of time
leads to a state in which the entire dopamine reward system
is impaired and can become permanently impaired
unless one intervenes in a very deliberate way.
So people are directly controlling the rate of dopamine
and the frequency of dopamine release
by the duration and frequency of inhalations
off the vape pen.
And that's an incredible thing because what it does
is it sets up the mesolimbic reward pathway
for an expectation that dopamine will be delivered
on that schedule.
So that's one of the things that makes vaping in particular
so hard to quit.
Vaping is actually harder to quit than cigarette smoking
for most people.
Now, does that mean that cigarette smoking
is fairly easy to quit for most people?
No.
70% of people who smoke cigarettes report
that they would like to quit if they thought they could.
The success rate of quitting smoking
when people try to go just cold turkey,
just quit with no assistance whatsoever,
they might tell their family and friends,
hey, I'm quitting, that's it, is exceedingly low.
It's 5%.
So 5% of the people that say, that's it,
I'm not smoking again, despite cancer diagnosis,
I'm not smoking again,
despite the fear of the negative health effects,
I'm not going to ever smoke again,
despite the financial costs, the health costs.
I mean, I could list off the huge number of things
that it does that are negative,
but you already know these or you've heard them.
It makes your skin worse.
As I mentioned, it lowers libido, it disrupts hormones,
it disrupts vascular function, brain function,
it does all these terrible things,
and yet most people who try and quit simply can't.
And of the 5% that succeed in quitting,
a full 65% of them relapse within a year.
So that's a very depressing picture,
but it's not to say that people cannot quit,
and in fact, they can.
There are a couple of methods that have been shown
to help people quit.
Some are behavioral and some are pharmacologic.
I just want to touch on the behavioral ones first,
because it turns out that there's a quite powerful method
for quitting nicotine ingestion
by way of cigarette smoking,
which also carries over to vaping.
This is beautiful work that's been done by my colleague,
in fact, close collaborator,
although I was not involved in the research
that I'm about to describe, at Stanford,
and his name is Dr. David Spiegel.
He is our associate chair of psychiatry.
He's been a guest on the Huberman Lab Podcast,
and he is a world expert, if not the world expert,
in the clinical applications of hypnosis.
Now, when I say hypnosis,
a lot of people think stage hypnosis,
which is the hypnotist trying to get people
to do certain things and say certain things,
not necessarily against their will,
because they actually have to agree,
but the hypnotist is dictating
what the person thinks, says, and does.
Clinical hypnosis is vastly different from that.
Clinical hypnosis is where the person, the patient,
actually directs their own brain changes
toward a specific emotional or behavioral goal.
Work from Dr. David Spiegel's laboratory, done in 1993,
but that now has been repeated many, many times,
has carried over into some more modern studies,
and I will provide links to those studies
in the show note caption so that you can access them.
Those studies have shown
that using a specific form of hypnosis,
people can achieve complete and total cessation
of cigarette smoking,
and there's no reason to believe
this doesn't also carry over to vaping
through one single hypnosis session.
And the success rates are incredibly high
when one considers that normally
it would be only a 5% success rate.
The success rate with this particular hypnosis
developed at Stanford School of Medicine
by Dr. David Spiegel is 23% of people
who do this hypnosis one time succeed in quitting smoking.
Now, in the old days, which actually wasn't that long ago,
before the advent of smartphones
and before the internet took off to the extent
that it has now,
this was done by having someone come into the clinic,
and Dr. Spiegel himself or one of his colleagues
would take somebody through the hypnosis.
Nowadays, you can access this hypnosis.
There's a wonderful app
that was developed by Dr. David Spiegel and others.
It's called Reveri, R-E-V-E-R-I.
I've talked about this app a few times on the podcast before
because there are hypnosis scripts within the app
for enhancing sleep, for improving ability to fall asleep
if you wake up in the middle of the night,
for focus and a number of other
behavioral and emotional changes.
There's also a function in the Reveri app
for smoking cessation,
which exactly parallels the sort of in laboratory
and in clinic approaches that Dr. Spiegel would use
for you to show up at his clinic or in his laboratory.
And since that's not possible
for the large number of people out there,
if you or somebody else is trying to quit smoking
or vaping or dipping or snuffing for that matter,
I strongly encourage you to check out the Reveri app.
You can find it easily by going to reveri.com.
It's available in various formats.
Some of it is available free,
some of it is behind a paywall,
but given the tremendously negative impact of smoking,
vaping, dipping, and snuffing,
the hypnosis for smoking cessation that Reveri has
seems at least to me as a very powerful
and worthwhile resource.
So please check that out if you're somebody
who's trying to quit ingesting nicotine
by any of the four methods that I just described.
Now, of course, there are other methods
that people have used to successfully quit smoking
or vaping or other forms of nicotine delivery.
And there's actually an excellent review on this topic.
So before diving into a few of the specifics
about some of the pharmacology of using nicotine itself
to quit smoking or nicotine itself to quit vaping,
or the use of various things,
even SSRIs, antidepressants, to quit smoking or vaping,
I just want to point you to a review article
that if you'd like to get a complete survey
of all the options that are available,
there's an excellent review on this.
It was published just a couple of years ago in 2020.
The title of the article is pharmacologic approach
to smoking cessation,
an updated review for daily clinical practice.
And even though this is mainly focused on smoking cessation,
it carries over quite nicely to vaping.
And it details a number of statistics,
the fact that every year 700,000 or more people die
because of smoking related diseases.
So there again, you have the negative health effects
that younger people are smoking,
that women are smoking more nowadays,
and that even though you see less smoking
typically in the US and Canada,
and even in Northern Europe, some places,
there's still many, many people are smoking
who would like to quit.
But that 75% of people,
at least according to this review earlier, I said 70%,
but estimates are as high as 75% of people
who try to quit smoking relapse within the first week.
The first week, they just go right back to it.
That's how powerfully reinforcing the nicotine is.
Remember, it's the nicotine in the cigarette
that's powerfully reinforcing,
but it's also the oral habit, the motor habit.
There is this thing about density of sensory receptors
in the lips.
People like bringing things to their lips,
food, cigarettes, other lips in some cases, et cetera.
There is a reinforcement pathway related to that
for sort of obvious adaptive reasons.
And as a consequence, there is a reinforcement
both from the behavior
and from the dopamine released from the nicotine itself.
And as I mentioned earlier,
from the positive reinforcement
that comes from increased focus,
so the money that you make through work
or your attentional ability,
or the fact that you're alert
and people feel you present,
all of that funnels back into positive reinforcement,
behavioral reinforcement,
and then what we would call addiction.
So this review covers all of that
and then steps beautifully
through nicotine replacement therapy and various compounds,
several of which I'm going to talk about now,
which have been shown to increase that number
that we talked about earlier of only 5% of people
who try to quit with no other support,
pharmacologic or hypnosis or otherwise,
just say, that's it, I'm not going to smoke again,
or I'm not going to vape again.
Only 5% of people succeed in doing that.
And even among those, many end up relapsing later.
There are a couple of pharmacologic approaches.
One of the main ones that's received a lot of attention
in recent years is Bupriperone,
sometimes referred to by its commercial name, Wellbutrin.
Now, Bupriperone is a compound
that increases the release of dopamine
and to a lesser extent epinephrine
and some other neurochemicals as well.
It's used for the treatment of depression
and for smoking cessation.
Now, I want to point out again, I'm not a psychiatrist,
so I'm not telling you to take Bupriperone,
AKA Wellbutrin, but I'm going to give you a little bit
of the contour of what's typically done
in terms of Bupriperone administration
to help people get relief
from some of the withdrawal symptoms
of trying to quit smoking or vaping
or other forms of nicotine ingestion.
Typically, Bupriperone is taken
in 300 milligram per day doses
divided into two dosages of 150 milligrams each,
or sometimes there's a slow release formula.
The dosages will vary from person to person.
I want to really emphasize
that there is an increased seizure risk with Bupriperone.
It only occurs in a small fraction of the population,
but nonetheless is a real concern
for those members of the population.
So for those of you with seizure risk,
whether you know it or not,
that's going to be a valid concern
in terms of potential side effects.
The other thing about Bupriperone is that it has to be used
with caution in patients that have liver disease
or renal disease that can impact
the amount that anyone can take,
meaning sometimes people have to take a much lower dose
if they have renal disease or liver disease,
and sometimes they can't take it at all.
Sometimes if people are taking benzodiazepines
for whatever reason or other sedatives,
there are contraindications there.
So Bupriperone isn't a kind of one-size-fits-all
or magic bullet for quitting smoking.
Nonetheless, for people that can take it safely,
and again, this is a prescription drug,
a board certified psychiatrist or other physician
is going to have to prescribe it for you
if it's appropriate for you,
and it moves that number of 5% success rate
to about what one sees with the clinical hypnosis
to about 20% of people
will successfully overcome their nicotine,
or I should say their smoking or vaping addiction.
Now it's important to ask why this would work, right?
I mean, it's not as if Bupriperone
is increasing nicotine per se.
What it's doing is it's tapping
on that mesolimbic reward pathway, increasing dopamine,
or at least allowing dopamine levels
to stay substantially elevated enough
that people don't experience some of the drop in dopamine
that leads to the withdrawal symptoms,
the lessening of mood, et cetera,
and it's no coincidence that Bupriperone
is also an antidepressant.
It's a common antidepressant
for people that experience negative side effects
with the so-called SSRIs,
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
that prevent them from taking those things
like lessen libido or appetite,
or in some cases increased appetite,
or any number of other side effects that some people,
not all, but some people experience with SSRIs.
They'll be prescribed Wellbutrin, Bupriperone
is the generic name.
So Wellbutrin being the commercial name,
again, Bupriperone is what they'll be prescribed instead.
With the caveats of seizure risk, renal disease,
liver disease, et cetera,
the outcomes with Wellbutrin for smoking cessation
are pretty good.
I mean, if you think about an increase from 5% to 20%,
that's pretty dramatic,
and yet I also want to refer back to the incredible success
of the clinical hypnosis approach.
Again, you can find that at reverie.com.
The clinical hypnosis approach has a success rate of 23%.
So it's very closely aligned with,
if not exceeding the success rate with Bupriperone.
Of course, there are other pharmacologic approaches
to quitting smoking or vaping.
All of them generally circle back to increasing dopamine
and or norepinephrine
in order to offset some of the withdrawal symptoms
of smoking sensation or vaping cessation.
A very common approach for people to try and quit smoking
or vaping is to use nicotine itself
to try and prevent people from seeking nicotine
through a cigarette or a vape pen.
What I mean by that is people using a nicotine patch
or nicotine gum or other nicotine delivery device
that is not cigarettes and not vaping
in order to maintain levels of nicotine
in their bloodstream,
which of course means maintain levels of nicotine
in their brain and body
to the same extent that they would
if they were smoking or vaping,
maybe even gradually taking down the total amount of nicotine
in their brain and body by reducing the number
or size of nicotine gum pieces that they ingest each day
or keeping the patch on for a shorter amount of time
or getting a lower dose patch
that releases less nicotine total or over time.
All of those approaches have been shown
to be reasonably successful.
I'll get to the numbers in a few minutes,
but reasonably successful in allowing people
to quit smoking or vaping.
Again, most of the data is on cigarette smoking
because vaping is a relatively new phenomenon,
although quite troublingly,
it's a very rapidly increasing behavior,
especially in the young population.
So that's why I'm kind of lumping these two things together
because I think very soon we are going to need
an all out campaign for how to counter vaping addiction.
So what do we know about smoking sensation
using nicotine itself?
Is the patch best?
Is nicotine gum best?
It turns out that a combination of approaches is best.
So somewhat surprising,
but it was very clear from the literature
that I was able to find that using nicotine patches
for some period of time and then switching to a gum
and then perhaps switching to a nasal spray,
that's going to be the most effective.
Then the question is how long to continue each of those
and whether or not to overlap them.
It seems as if doing one for about a week
and then switching to another for about a week
and then switching to another is one rational
and reasonable approach
that many people have used successfully.
Why would that be?
Well, it all has to do with the different rates
of absorption of nicotine into the bloodstream
and then the downstream consequences of that
on the dopamine, acetylcholine, epinephrine,
and other systems of the brain and body.
And while there hasn't been an extremely detailed study
of the exact kinetics of how the nasal sprays
versus the transdermal patches versus the gums, et cetera,
work, there's a logical structure to it
that will immediately make sense to you.
First of all, the transdermal patches
provide a fairly steady state dopamine release
across the day.
And oftentimes people are wearing them at night as well.
This is relevant because if people are ingesting nicotine
by way of smoking and vaping,
hopefully they're not waking up in the middle of the night
just to smoke or vape, or believe it or not,
some people do that.
But of course, while people are asleep,
they are not smoking or vaping.
They always tell you don't fall asleep
with a cigarette in your mouth,
you burn the whole house down.
But exceedingly rare to have people
who are smoking in their sleep.
So people wake up in the morning
and because the half-life of nicotine from smoking or vaping
is very short, anywhere from one to two hours,
they are essentially in a state of withdrawal
at the point where they wake up in the morning.
How can I say that?
Well, remember withdrawal sets in about four hours
after the last ingestion of nicotine by cigarette
or by inhalation from the vape pen.
So people are waking up in nicotine withdrawal
and then immediately going into
the behavior of ingesting nicotine
or very soon after waking for most people.
So nicotine patch is going to be very effective
for a week or so.
Again, talk to your physician
about the best approach for this,
but then switching to a nasal spray
or switching to nicotine gum for about a week,
which is going to change the kinetics
of that nicotine absorption to the bloodstream
and change the release of dopamine
and other neurochemicals within the brain.
That's going to keep the system intentionally off balance
so that it never comes to expect one single pattern
or amplitude of dopamine release.
And that is a very powerful way for a,
let's just call it a quitting method to work
because as I've always said,
the most powerful schedule of dopamine
is going to be this random intermittent reward.
This is what's used in the casinos
in order to take your money.
And generally they do on average,
they take your money more than you take theirs
and they take more of it, not just more often,
because they use this random intermittent schedule.
The random intermittent schedule is one in which
you don't really know when the peaks in dopamine
are going to arrive.
And so there isn't this expectation and craving.
And then all of a sudden when dopamine is released,
it's extremely high.
That's how they get you to continue playing
even though basically you're losing money
and your dopamine is dropping.
They elevate it every once in a while.
Nicotine replacement can be used in a similar way,
but in a benevolent way in order to help you get over
smoking or vaping by keeping the total amounts
of dopamine variable around the clock.
And by changing the amount of dopamine that's released,
it seems to help people behaviorally and psychologically
because they don't come to expect
having a particular amount of dopamine
in their brain and blood at any given time.
And this is an important point because it brings us
to this notion of homeostasis.
Homeostasis is this tendency for biological systems
to try and reach equilibrium.
What goes up, goes down, et cetera,
and to some extent to the same degree.
So I'll talk about this right now in the context
of nicotine use, withdrawal,
and then the period in which people
no longer crave nicotine.
So you can imagine that if we were to measure
your heart rate, your blood pressure,
and your overall levels of alertness and wellbeing and mood,
let's just give that some value.
Let's say it runs from zero to 10.
Again, arbitrary units.
Let's just take all those physiological measures
and the subjective measure of your mood,
and let's measure it four times an hour across the day,
across the waking hours.
What we would find is a line that would kind of
squiggle a bit, maybe a nice text comes in
that you really like, maybe you get a not so good news
and your kind of autonomic arousal is all over the place.
But on average, it's kind of a squiggly line
where it increases in the morning
because that's typically when body temperature
and autonomic arousal increase.
And then towards the afternoon,
it's going to come sloping down.
And then right before sleep, there'll be an increase again.
If you've ever felt that,
you kind of run around a lot before sleep,
and then it goes down.
That's kind of the typical contour of autonomic arousal,
mood, et cetera, across the day.
Removing, of course, life events
and things like psychiatric illness and depression
and et cetera, that's the typical arc of that.
Now let's superimpose on whatever that contour is for you,
nicotine.
So get a little bolus, as we say,
a little bit of nicotine from smoking a cigarette
or from taking inhalation on a vape pen.
What ends up happening is there's an increase
in blood pressure, increase in heart rate,
increase in mood, increase in alertness,
all the things we talked about earlier.
Over time, the body starts to adjust
so that the baseline upon which
that nicotine-induced increase in arousal would occur
is actually reduced, right?
Why would that be?
Well, the body and the brain,
your physiology seeks homeostasis.
So if there's a big increase in all those things
like blood pressure and mood, et cetera,
typically your baseline will drop a little bit
to compensate for that over time
after a couple of days or even weeks of ingesting nicotine.
So let's say you wake up,
you typically take an inhalation off your vape
or you have a cigarette around nine or 10 a.m.
and you do that daily.
You get used to a certain level of mood and alertness
and wellbeing for that time of day.
And then if you smoke again in the afternoon, let's say,
you also get accustomed to a certain level
of mood and alertness and wellbeing for that time of day.
Again, it'll vary depending on life events,
but your system sort of gets used to it
and your baseline will drop to compensate for those peaks
so that the peaks aren't quite as high as they were
when you first started using nicotine.
Now you decide to quit.
So now what we're talking about is transitioning
from the consumption
to what we're going to call the withdrawal phase.
Now what happens is you say, that's it,
I'm going cold turkey.
I know there's only a 5% success rate,
but I'm going to just go cold turkey.
Or somebody will say, no,
I'm going to use the Reverie app.
Or somebody says, no,
I'm going to use buprenorphine or another method
or nicotine patch or something of that sort.
Well, setting aside the nicotine patch
or the nicotine delivery device,
and only focusing on approaches
for getting through withdrawal
that have no direct effects on nicotine, okay?
So not using the nicotine patch,
but say the hypnosis or buprenorphine,
which can increase dopamine,
but it doesn't increase nicotine directly.
What happens?
The day that you quit,
that homeostatic mechanism in your brain and body
that sets your level of mood and arousal, et cetera,
does not know and hasn't adjusted to the fact
that you're not bringing in nicotine.
You're not having that cigarette.
You're not having that inhalation on the vape pen.
So what ends up happening is that baseline,
which has been adjusted down to offset the increases
in mood and alertness, et cetera,
when you smoke or vape is lower than it normally would be.
So that 9 a.m. cigarette time or vape inhalation time
no longer feels above baseline.
It actually feels below baseline
because what you're seeing is the lower amplitude of arousal
that was there to offset the increase you were getting
from vaping or smoking.
And then in the afternoon,
if normally you have a kind of phase of your afternoon
you really enjoy, you go outside,
you have a vape or a cigarette,
you normally are feeling relaxed
or you go out at night and you'd like to vape
and you say, nope, I'm not going to do that anymore,
you're going to feel much, much worse
than you would have had you never started smoking or vaping.
Now that's not much help to anyone
who's already started smoking or vaping,
but I say this because it's very important to understand
that the reason why relapse rates
are so high within the first week,
75% of people relapse within one week
and overall failure rates are 95%
is because people don't expect to feel even worse
than they did prior to ever smoking or vaping.
So that first week is absolutely critical.
And the beauty of understanding this
is that if you can get through that first week
either by sheer grit or by finding other methods
to increase dopamine, healthy methods, I would hope,
and certainly cold showers, ice baths
have been shown to do that by the way.
This was described in Dr. Anna Lemke's book,
''Dopamine Nation''.
Cold showers can increase dopamine exercise,
positive social interactions.
It's very likely that people will need to use
other healthy methods to offset that reduction in dopamine
if ever they stand to get through that first week.
And again, if you can get through that first week,
chances are quite a bit higher
that you'll be able to maintain
the cessation of smoking or vaping.
And of course, hypnosis,
things like buprenparone can also assist in that.
Buprenparone by way of increasing
dopamine pharmacologically,
hypnosis through changes in neural circuitry
that aren't completely understood,
but seem to involve a remapping
of some of the so-called default networks
and some of the networks that are involved
in kind of understanding of your own internal state.
This stuff gets a little bit complicated
and we're going to return to this
in an upcoming episode of the Huberton Lab Podcast,
but there are indeed legitimate changes
in neural circuitry caused by clinical hypnosis
that can at least partially explain
why it is so effective in helping treat
or allow people to stop smoking and vaping.
So for those of you out there
that either hear or are saying yourselves,
I just can't seem to quit smoking or vaping
or dipping or snuffing,
hopefully an understanding
of how that homeostasis process works
and the time course of nicotine,
depending on the delivery device,
hopefully understanding that
will allow you to develop a protocol,
maybe it involves hypnosis,
maybe it involves just understanding
that the typical times in which you ingested nicotine
through any of the different approaches
of bringing it into your system
are going to be particularly hard,
but I don't just mean particularly hard,
I mean particularly hard
and you're going to need to do something specific
to offset that decrease in overall autonomic arousal
and dopamine, et cetera.
Hopefully an understanding of that
will allow you to get through that first week
and if you can make it past that first week,
you stand a very good chance of never going back.
However, I did consult with Dr. David Spiegel
in anticipation of this episode,
regardless of the method that you used
to quit smoking or vaping, snuffing or dipping.
There's good evidence that a routine,
maybe once a month or even once a week
hypnosis type approach
to replenish or even enhance the neural circuits
that are allowing you to stay away from nicotine
is going to be a very good idea.
And given that it's a purely behavioral intervention,
I can see no reason as to why
people wouldn't want to do that.
Go in and reinforce, tighten the bolts on that circuitry
that are allowing you to not feel the impulse to smoke,
not feel the impulse to vape.
And just a very brief mention,
there is a vast literature on the fact
that when people have quit smoking or vaping
or other form of consuming nicotine,
that when they consume alcohol,
there's a much higher probability of relapse.
There are interactions between alcohol and nicotine
that we'll cover in future episodes.
But for those of you that want to quit,
I want to assure you,
despite the fact that 95% of people fail
with the appropriate tools,
and I like to think with an additional understanding
of the underlying biology and psychology
and what you can expect and when to really dig your heels
and when to reinforce your system with more dopamine
through any of the number of the different protocols
and tools that we've offered here
and that you can find elsewhere
and other episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast,
I have a high degree of confidence
that you can quit smoking or vaping, dipping or snuffing.
So today, typical of, frankly,
all episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast,
we've covered a lot about the biology
of a particular system.
We talked about the biology of nicotine in particular.
We talked about vaping and smoking, dipping and snuffing,
and the negative health consequences associated with those.
I want to reemphasize that nicotine is not
what causes cancer, it is the delivery device
that causes cancer and the other negative health effects.
That is not to say that people should be ingesting nicotine
through any different methods
simply to get a cognitive boost.
There are certain circumstances
where that might be appropriate,
for the occasional work bout,
certainly not for physical exercise,
given what we talked about earlier.
But of course, there are more and more approaches
to increasing, not just nicotine,
but acetylcholine generally,
in order to achieve cognitive enhancement
or physical enhancement,
or I should say physical performance enhancement.
Some of those we talked about earlier, such as alpha-GPC.
In any event, nicotine, it should now be clear,
is an immensely powerful substance,
one of the most commonly ingested substances
on the face of the earth and has been for a very long time.
And now that you understand the underlying biology
and the way in which it changes
your psychology and physiology,
that should come as no surprise.
If you're learning from and are enjoying this podcast,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
That's a terrific zero cost way to support us.
In addition, please subscribe to the podcast
on Apple and Spotify.
And on both Apple and Spotify,
you can leave us up to a five-star review.
If you have questions or comments
or suggestions of topics you'd like us to cover
or guests you'd like us to invite
onto the Huberman Lab podcast,
please put those in the comment section on YouTube.
We do read all the comments.
Please also check out the sponsors mentioned
at the beginning of today's episode.
That is the best way to support this podcast.
During today's episode and on various previous episodes
of the Huberman Lab podcast, we talk about supplements.
While supplements aren't necessary for everybody,
many people derive tremendous benefit from them
for things like enhancing sleep, hormone function,
focus, and so on.
The Huberman Lab podcast has partnered
with Momentous Supplements, spelled Momentous O-U-S.
You can find those supplements
at livemomentous.com slash Huberman.
If you haven't already subscribed
to the Huberman Lab podcast neural network newsletter,
it's a monthly newsletter.
We provide summaries of different podcasts
and we provide summaries of specific tools
that you can use to enhance sleep, for instance,
or enhance dopamine.
We talk about deliberate cold exposure,
deliberate heat exposure.
It's very easy to sign up for
and it's completely zero cost.
Go to HubermanLab.com, go to the menu, click on newsletter,
provide us your email.
We do not share it with anybody else
and you'll receive that monthly newsletter.
And there you can also find PDFs of previous newsletters
that you can immediate download
without even having to sign up.
If you're not already following us on social media,
we are Huberman Lab on Twitter, Huberman Lab on Instagram,
and Huberman Lab on Facebook.
And at all of those locations,
I describe science and science-related tools,
some of which overlap with the content
of the Huberman Lab podcast,
much of which is distinct from the content covered
on the Huberman Lab podcast.
So once again, I'd like to thank you for joining me today
for a discussion about the biology
and psychological effects of nicotine,
this incredibly powerful substance.
And as always, thank you for your interest in science.